---
layout: post
title:  "My ferments: different kinds of sauerkrauts"
author: shirish
categories: [ fermentation, hobby ]
---

## THIS IS A DRAFT. THE FERMENTATION BLOG IS A WORK IN PROGRESS! READ THIS ONLY IF YOU WISH TO BE DISAPPOINTED BY LACK OF FINNESSE
Soured veggies, fermented in their own juices. First thing to do is to salt the vegetables to dehydrate them slightly, to break the cell walls, then clean off the salt (otherwise its too salty). Cut them to small pieces to begin with. Then pack them tight in a preferably glass jar. Add spices of your choice, even sugar (not too much otherwise will go bad). Put in warm temperature. Make sure to put it over a tub because the container will overflow...The fermentation will create CO2 bubbles that will displace the water, and eventually water will come out of the container. Also important to not seal the container airtight or it'll explode. Push back the veggies every couple of days, or put heavy 'sacrificial' vegetable like cabbage that will probably go bad, but will protect the other vegetables from air contact. Like Kimchi, important to make sure it's in a decently warm temperature, otherwise it'll be slow to ferment, more opportunities for pathogens to spoil it. Recommend above 60F. Can be eaten just like that, in salads, sandwiches, as sides, with rice or other carbs, can be cooked, even in soups, for fried rice! Need to make sure you are testing every couple of days after the first week, don't want it to be too sour, or too limp, otherwise no great texture, and the vegetables will break down into a mush. Play around with spices but be careful, some of them might have anti biotic / anti-bacterial or fungal properties, and that might mess around with the ferment, better to start off with a known tested recipe.